====architecure
https://safari.ethz.ch/architecture/fall2025/doku.php?id=schedule
very nice course on Computer Architecture – Fall 2025
* has most general trade-offs besides internal computing bus design
  where I'd expect something along optimizing each phase of computing operations

"Architecture 2.0: Toward Open Source Foundation Models and Datasets for Hardware Design"
Technology (Moore,Dennard's scaling, dark silicon)
Architecture(hw-support for parallelism, acceleration)
Optimization(application-tuning, full-stack optimization, hw/sw co-design)
Specification(domain-specific hardware)
Future: AI-assistance/automation
1 no datasets, 2 unclear ML algos, 3 workforce & training(no best practices),
4 tools & infra, 5 best practice
idea: simulators (speed vs accuracy) for data generation
* no tangible first delivery
* design space exploration probably first tangible goal
* goal: reduce cost of building chips

====practical_design_iteration_architecture
in theory problem can be formulated as search problem and thus different strategies be applied
in practice one is then tackling a different issue all together

example instruction reordering in OoO archs with some aspects:
* Returning data (catch the ball in flight, don't wait for it to land on the ground,
  doing this is "fun", because one wants to allocate an execution unit the moment
  the ball is thrown such that it is thrown into the next instruction on the same cycle,
  and some pitchers are sporadic like division, memory reads, etc)
* Prioritizing instruction calls (I focus on trimming branches, but avoiding hotspots is
  also a concern so don't hammer the same execution units for too many cycles)
* Registers. (How many? Task specific registers or general ones? A neat array in a corner,
  or spread throughout core? Register renaming or not? Is decoded ordering important for write
  back or do we let the programmer experience the wobble? And how to quickly check their
  availability since else execution can't even happen. In a way register layout is more
  important for OoO design than instruction calls themselves, moving data is the challenge)
* Queue depth? (Some designs scales exponentially with added queue positions (or added registers),
  others more linearly but with other downsides)
* Thread/Context switching. (Can the next thread start now or do we need to wait for the
  prior to properly clear the area?)
* Optionally include SIMD instructions into the design. (moving register data and quickly
  finding dependencies is more or less The challenge, SIMD makes it harder)
* Optionally sprinkle Simultaneous Multi Threading on top for added complexity.
  (so I understand why Intel says "no SMT on Efficiency cores!" because SMT really isn't a
  free lunch, even if it is great for a lot of reasons. I however go with 8x SMT in my design,
  because I am crazy....)
* How many instructions are we dealing with per cycle?
  if core with 1 decoder giving 1 instruction/cycle, then we won't need a queuing system
  able to handle dozens of instructions in parallel. (this is not the same as low queue depth,
  just low parallel access. bandwidth vs capacity)
  We could rather have a simpler instruction reordering scheme that checks rather basic
  dependencies and allows us to speed up average instruction rate closer to 1 per cycle.
  Now slower instructions will end up providing a result alongside the faster ones, so
  some parallelism for the returns can be logical, but technically not a requirement. Since
  every time we get a multi cycle instruction, our return gets some "bubbles" that it can
  use to catch up, this does however mean that we have some additional latency for all
  returns to the register file, not ideal since it drastically impacts serial instruction
  throughput. (in a heavily SMTed core this doesn't matter.) One can complicate things here
  by adding priority for the return system, but making it able to handle 2 returns in parallel
  is easier.
  most modern archs: decoders spits out more than 1 instruction per cycle on average.
  Since parallel decoding is rather trivial and code at times is ripe with parallel operations
  that out of order will quickly churn through, so execution will catch up rather quickly at
  small queue depths and with a slow decoder.
  And stalling on decoding is inept. (barring the branching problem, bizarre jumps,
  unknown pointers, cache misses and other prefetch hindrances)

example register files
* can be implemented in a whole bunch of different ways
* interacting with it is another can of worms
* lot of people regard it as if all architectures are doing it like a 386, or 6502 (Which rarely is the case)

====comparison_HDL_to_PL
wondering how that actually works in practice wrt documentation, data secrecy
etc and how they prevent bus factors. I guess they have lots of custom tooling
to store that knowledge, because keeping docs secret and up to date often does
not work.
* much stricter boundaries of what is and isn't possible depending on impl
* CPU is a complex beast: nope, simplicity takes a lot of thinking to properly formulate
* CPU core is comparable to a rather small software project in terms of overall complexity
* example: buffer overflow is physically unable to rewire the logic of the CPU
* counter-example: side-channels like timing variations does spill data
  speculative execution for increased serial performance more important than memory security checks
* fault in a specific instruction breaks that instruction, not the whole CPU
* security only applicable at certain points in an architecture
* there is points in hardware where security is far more important, but that is the exception rather than the rule.
